
\chapter{Spectators}
\label{spectators}

At times expressions contain many terms that will not be treated for many 
modules to come. For the actions in those modules they are considered 
spectator terms. and they may consume much computer time due to their 
presence during the sorting. For this we have the spectator system in which 
we can send those terms to a special file, named a spectator file, in such 
a way that they can be picked up at a convenient time in the future. In 
short:

\noindent
Spectators are expressions together with a \index{filename}filename. The 
file is for storage when the spectator becomes too big. Create a spectator 
with the statement\index{createspectator}

    CreateSpectator Exprname,"filename";

\noindent
The file will be made in the same directory where the tmp files are made. 
Example:

    CreateSpectator Yintegrals,"Yfile.spec";

\noindent
One may send terms to a spectator with the executable 
statement\index{tospectator}

    ToSpectator Exprname;

\noindent
An example would be

    if ( count(Z,1) == 0 ) ToSpectator Yintegrals;

\noindent
The terms are dumped into the file as they are at the moment the 
ToSpectator statement is executed. No brackets etc.
In the future they may be compressed. At the moment they are not.

\noindent
Recovery of the contents of the spectator is done whith the CopySpectator
statement as in\index{copyspectator}

    CopySpectator NewExp = Yintegrals;

\noindent
Cuttently you can only read the spectators this way. You cannot make more 
complicated constructions. You can only do things with the terms of the 
spectator expression after the contents have been put in your new 
expression. The spectator file remains in existence. In later modules you 
can still add to it. You cannot read from and add to the same spectator in 
the same module. The CopySpectator command can be followed by executable 
statements in the same module. This may not be economical because the 
contents of the spectator have not been sorted. There could be identical 
terms that occur many times or even cancel. Better sort them first.

\noindent
A spectator can be removed from the system with the 
statement\index{removespectator}

\begin{minipage}{10cm}
    RemoveSpectator Yintegrals;
\end{minipage}

\noindent
It is also possible to truncate a spectator down to zero length 
with\index{emptyspectator}

\begin{minipage}{10cm}
    EmptySpectator Yintegrals;
\end{minipage}

\noindent
You can have as many spectators as you like, but they all have some cache 
buffers. There may also be limitations in the file system on the maximum 
number of open files. The filename for the spectator is purely for the sake 
of the users administration and recognition. You cannot carry the file over 
to other programs. There is no variable administration in it as in the 
saved files.

\noindent
The .global instruction makes a spectator file survive a .store. It is up 
to the user to make sure that all the variables in it also survive the 
.store. There is no checking!

\noindent
One use of the spectator system would be when integrating many different 
terms by means of a very prolonged recursion system in which integrals of a 
given complexity are reduced to integrals of lower complexity, but each 
such reduction may take quite a few steps. One could have:

\begin{minipage}{14cm}
\#do i = `MAXCOMPLEXITY'-1,0,-1

CreateSpectator complex`i',"complex`i'.spec";

\#enddo

Local F`MAXCOMPLEXITY' = ....;

\#do i = `MAXCOMPLEXITY'-1,1,-1

\ \#do ii = 1,1;

\ \ \ routine for doing a part of the recursion level `i'

\ \ \ \#do j = `i'-1,0,-1

\ \ \ \ \ if ( complexityofterm == `i' ) ToSpectator complex`i';

\ \ \ \#enddo

\ \ if ( notyetfinished ) redefine ii "0";

\ \ .sort

\ \#enddo

\ Drop F{`i'+1};

\ CopySpectator F`i' = complex`i';

\ .sort

\ RemoveSpectator complex`i';

\#enddo

*

*\ \ and finally, assuming that complexity zero means finished:

*

Drop F1;

CopySpectator F0 = complex0;

.sort

RemoveSpectator complex0;
\end{minipage}

\noindent
Some remarks are called for here. If one works with the 
polyratfun\index{polyratfun} concept and the rational 
polynomials\index{rational polynomials} become rather complicated, the 
sorting after the CopySpectator statement can have serious bottleneck 
problems in \index{TFORM}\TFORM{} and \index{ParFORM}\ParFORM{} because the 
addition of those polynomials can be rather expensive and much of it ends 
up in the master processor. This can be made better with the following 
construction (assuming the function rat was declared as polyratfun at the 
moment of all the ToSpectator statements that wrote to the spectator):

\begin{minipage}{10cm}
PolyRatFun;

Drop F1;

CopySpactator F0 = complex0;

ABracket+ rat;

.sort

PolyRatFun rat;

RemoveSpectator complex0;

.sort
\end{minipage}

\noindent
First we remove the declaration of rat as polyratfun. Then we read the 
spectator and sort it such that all terms that should be added eventually 
are grouped together. This sorting is very cheap as only identical terms 
are combined. Then we declare the polyratfun again and because of the way 
the terms are sorted nearly all additions take place inside the workers, 
hence at maximum parallelization efficiency.

\noindent
The above method still contains one inefficiency: because the polyratfun is 
declared again, the contents of the rat function need to be 'normalized' 
again, while they were already normalized. This involves calculating a gcd 
of the numerator and the denominator, which is an expensive operation 
and is useless in this case. For this we have a special option in the 
polyratfun declaration:

\begin{minipage}{10cm}
   PolyRatFun rat-;
\end{minipage}

\noindent
This will skip the normalization on the input of the module. One should 
note however that if one uses this option under different conditions in 
which the input rat function might not be normalized, the program might 
crash or even give wrong answers. Hence this option should only be used 
with the highest degree of caution! This is an option for very experienced 
users only. No support is given concerning programs that run correctly 
without the use of this option and fail when using it.

\noindent
It should be noted that in the sequential version of \FORM{} this 
construction is not needed at all, because there is only one processor 
anyway.

